MSC2540: Stricter event validation: JSON compliance (#2540)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2540-stricter-event-validation.md

# MSC2540: Stricter event validation: JSON compliance

## Background

There has been [prior discussions](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1646)
about validating events more strictly. This MSC proposes fixing a small piece of
this: JSON compliance.

The [Canonical JSON](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#canonical-json)
specification requires that numbers that are serialized in JSON are integers in
the range of [-2 ^ 53 + 1, 2 ^ 53 - 1], which matches the requirements of
[section 6 of RFC 7159](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159). Note that it is
not explicit, but all floats are invalid.

It is worth mentioning that there are common extensions to JSON which produce 
invalid JSON according to the Matrix specification, some programming langauges
even support these by default. One common additional feature is handling
"special" float values: `Infinity`, `-Infinity`, and `NaN`.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer: The proposal needs to describe the bug in the current spec as well, such as what current room versions are supposed to do with the information.

Author: I'm not sure I understand what you're suggesting here -- are you saying to specify the current behavior?

Reviewer: In a way, yes. The spec currently says that Canonical JSON is limited, however the proposal doesn't seem to spell out where it's wrong (or I'm blind/dumb, which is a possibility).

Author: I added some text about this in 03588cbf0dfe47b8eb6bcc0dbb53a1c39115044a, hopefully it meets what you're looking for!

Reviewer: looks like it - thank you!

> In a future room version, Matrix server implementations should strictly enforce

Reviewer: Proposals are demands, just in a friendly package: 
```suggestion
In a future room version, Matrix server implementations are to strictly enforce
```

the rationale for using demand-style language is that when this goes to the spec it'll essentially take the words on the page as-is, which means this would land as a literal "Servers SHOULD enforce..." instead of "Servers MUST enforce"

# MSC2540: Stricter event validation: JSON compliance

## Background

There has been [prior discussions](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1646)
about validating events more strictly. This MSC proposes fixing a small piece of
this: JSON compliance.

The [Canonical JSON](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#canonical-json)
specification requires that numbers that are serialized in JSON are integers in

> the range of [-2 ^ 53 + 1, 2 ^ 53 - 1], which matches the requirements of

Reviewer 2: This is a bit hard to read as it is (not helped by it ending up wrapped across lines)

```suggestion
the range of `[-2 ^ 53 + 1, 2 ^ 53 - 1]`, which matches the requirements of
```

Reviewer 3: Can we please also specify that this range is inclusive of the minimum and maximum values, to remove any doubt?

Author: I made both of these improvements.

[section 6 of RFC 7159](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159). Note that it is
not explicit, but all floats are invalid.

It is worth mentioning that there are common extensions to JSON which produce 

> invalid JSON according to the Matrix specification, some programming langauges

Reviewer 2: TIL this is called a [comma splice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma_splice):

```suggestion
invalid JSON according to the Matrix specification; some programming langauges
```

even support these by default. One common additional feature is handling
"special" float values: `Infinity`, `-Infinity`, and `NaN`.

## Proposal

In a future room version, homeserver implementations are to strictly enforce
the JSON compliance of the Canonical JSON specification for events. Events that

> do not abide by these rules should be rejected with the error code `M_NOT_JSON`.

Author: I was unsure if this should be `M_NOT_JSON` or `M_BAD_JSON`:

> `M_BAD_JSON`: Request contained valid JSON, but it was malformed in some way, e.g. missing required keys, invalid values for keys.
> `M_NOT_JSON`: Request did not contain valid JSON.

Reviewer 4: I'd vote for `M_BAD_JSON`, but either could work for me.

Reviewer 5: I think given the definitions you quoted and the fact that we're explicitly saying it is 'invalid' JSON, `M_NOT_JSON ` is the Correct choice, but I'd be lying if I said it was going to keep me awake at night.

Author: A reason I chose `M_NOT_JSON` is that it seems like a server implementation might literally be unable to parse it and thus just reject it as if it were a random string of bytes.

(E.g. I believe Java's and Go's JSON parsers would choke on some of the examples above.)

Reviewer 2: I think there's an argument either way. Indeed the spec could even allow servers to return either.

> do not abide by these rules should be rejected with the error code `M_NOT_JSON`.

Reviewer 2: presumably this only applies to events submitted via [`PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.0#put-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-send-eventtype-txnid) and friends. Events sent via [`PUT /_matrix/federation/v1/send/{txnId}`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.3#put-matrix-federation-v1-send-txnid) just get a textual description if they are invalid.

(It would be nice to clarify the behaviour if a federation `/send` request causes us to retrieve an event which fails this sort of validation check, but given that is rather underspecified currently, I suspect attempting to do so would be futile)

Reviewer: also `/get_missing_events` etc. The spec already has a section on checks for receiving a PDU, though it's obviously unclear what "dropped" means in practice.

Author: Had a brief chat with @richvdh about this and it seems to make sense to weaken this a bit and say something like:
> Events that do not abide by these rules should be treated like any other bad JSON value.

Author: See f5ebe33a9ce858ad3bde26a35bd15437e4eb3ee5

> In a future room version, homeserver implementations are to strictly enforce
> the JSON compliance of the Canonical JSON specification for events. Events that
> do not abide by these rules should be treated like any other bad JSON value.

Reviewer 2: I spent a while wondering what synapse actually does for `/_matrix/federation/v1/send`, and eventually realised that it rejects the whole transaction with 400 / `M_BAD_JSON`, which on reflection is (a) probably the right thing to do and (b) basically what this said before I told @clokep to change it :-S

```suggestion
In a future room version, homeserver implementations are to strictly enforce
the JSON compliance of the Canonical JSON specification for events.
Non-compliant events should be treated like any other malformed event, 
for example by rejecting the request with an HTTP 400 error with `M_BAD_JSON`.
```

Reviewer 6: Can you talk a little more about why rejecting the whole transaction is correct? This is specifically per room version and so it feels very weird for a buggy event in one room to take out all federation.

In general, I'd have thought we want to never return a 400 for `/send` (unless it really is malformed JSON).

Reviewer 3: > Can you talk a little more about why rejecting the whole transaction is correct? This is specifically per room version and so it feels very weird for a buggy event in one room to take out all federation.

Incidentally, this is something that we pondered in Dendrite. Currently we'll return a 400 if the enclosing JSON for the transaction is invalid, but we *don't* if a single event within the transaction is invalid - otherwise we just end up dropping other perfectly valid events.

Reviewer 2: ok, so in `/v1/send`, you've got three choices if you don't like a given event:

1. silently drop the event. I would argue that we should not be blackholing events, ever: it feels like we'll end up dropping events unexpectedly.
2. send an error back in the response, against the event's event_id. This, of course, requires the recipient to parse the json, remove a couple of properties, then re-encode it using canonicaljson (which, you recall, is theoretically impossible) to calculate the event id. That sounds like a tautology to me. It also requires servers which don't even support older room versions to still accept transactions with floats in them. So that leaves us with:
3. reject the whole lot.

It's also worth noting that we do the same thing for some other basic failures here:
 * events with no `type` or `depth`; 
 * events with bad `depth` values
 * events in v{1,2} rooms with no `event_id`/v3+ rooms *with* an `event_id`
 * etc

It basically comes down to: "you've got to at least be able to parse the event into the `FrozenEvent` structure to be able to send back a sensible error".

> feels very weird for a buggy event in one room to take out all federation.

kinda maybe? if the server is allowing buggy events in, the server is buggy, and I'm not sure I want to talk to it.

>  Currently we'll return a 400 if the enclosing JSON for the transaction is invalid, but we don't if a single event within the transaction is invalid

this is correct, but the line around "the enclosing JSON is invalid" is fuzzy imho. 

(To be clear, one of the reasons I think we should phrase this as "for example" is to allow impls some wiggle-room here so that they can do things that make sense depending on how they implement transaction parsing).

Reviewer 6: > silently drop the event. I would argue that we should not be blackholing events, ever: it feels like we'll end up dropping events unexpectedly.

I mean, we soft fail events and redact them and do all sorts of things without informing the remote server, though agreed ideally we'd communicate back to the remote server that they sent us a dodgy event. We also currently silently drop events that don't have a room ID or a recognised room version (though ideally we probably do want to return something to the remote to indicate we've dropped them).

We can do this a couple of ways without involving the event ID:

1. Return a general "FYI one of the events you sent was invalid", which is enough to narrow down to a (likely small) set of events that can be checked manually
2. Return an error and point to the event via its position in the PDU list , e.g. "The 5th event was dodgy and dropped".

> It also requires servers which don't even support older room versions to still accept transactions with floats in them.

Well, its just JSON so that doesn't seem a big deal? Or are we aiming for saying that all APIs are canonical JSON?

> kinda maybe? if the server is allowing buggy events in, the server is buggy, and I'm not sure I want to talk to it.

Right now synapse is buggy because its not following the spec and is happily spitting out invalid canonical json. I think its going to be quite likely server implementations are going to occasionally and subtly mess this up, I can totally foresee a class of vulnerabilities along the lines of "post this content over CS API and watch it break federation to all servers in the room", limiting it to per room feels like a significant partial win to me.

> It's also worth noting that we do the same thing for some other basic failures here

Its not clear to me that that is intentional or desirable TBH.

Reviewer 2: in further discussion, Erik convinced me that dropping the events is probably a better solution (for now at least) than rejecting the whole transaction - ie, treating them the same way as events from unknown rooms, or events with no room_id. Indeed, we should probably do the same for the other cases I mentioned (bad `type`/`depth`/`event_id`/etc).

In the *future*, extending the API to return an error in one of the ways Erik mentioned seems like a good idea, but let's descope that for now.

For this MSC, we probably just want to leave things up to the impl:

```suggestion
In a future room version, homeserver implementations are to strictly enforce
the JSON compliance of the Canonical JSON specification for events.
Non-compliant events should be treated like any other malformed event, 
for example by rejecting the request with an HTTP 400 error with `M_BAD_JSON`,
or by discarding the event.
```

Author: I think that sounds like a nice middle ground without overly specifying the behavior.

The rationale for doing this in a future room version is to avoid a split brain
room -- where some federated servers believe an event is valid and others reject
it as invalid. Rooms will be able to opt into this behavior as part of a room
version upgrade.

Homeserver implementations are not to strictly enforce this JSON compliance in
[room versions 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/#complete-list-of-room-versions).

> The rationale is essentially the same as why a future room version is necessary,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rationale is essentially the same as why a future room version is necessary:
```

this ensures that all federated servers treat the same events as valid.

## Potential issues

Homeserver implementations might include JSON parsers which are stricter than
others. It may not be worthwhile or reasonable to loosen those restrictions for
stable room versions. 

## Alternatives

It could be argued that this MSC is unnecessary since it does not add any new
requirements for handling of JSON data. Unfortunately starting to enforce these 
requirements in current rooms could cause federation to break as homeservers
will disagree on whether events are valid.

## Security considerations

N/A

## Unstable prefix

> A room versions of `org.matrix.strict_canonicaljson` until a future room version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A room version of `org.matrix.strict_canonicaljson` until a future room version
```

## Proposal

In a future room version, homeserver implementations are to strictly enforce
the JSON compliance of the Canonical JSON specification for events. Events that
do not abide by these rules should be rejected with the error code `M_NOT_JSON`.

The rationale for doing this in a future room version is to avoid a split brain
room -- where some federated servers believe an event is valid and others reject
it as invalid. Rooms will be able to opt into this behavior as part of a room
version upgrade.

> Homeserver implementations are not to strictly enforce this JSON compliance in
> [stable room versions](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/#complete-list-of-room-versions).

Reviewer: This might not age well:
```suggestion
Homeserver implementations are not to strictly enforce this JSON compliance in
[room versions 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/#complete-list-of-room-versions).
```

Author: Ah, yeah should have included "at the time of writing" or something. Listing them out is better! 👍  Thank you!
